# Plugins, API, CRDs, Operators, and Security in Kubernetes

1. Plugins in Kubernetes

Plugins extend Kubernetes functionality. They add new features without changing Kubernetes core code.

Types of Plugins
Plugin Type	            What It Does	                    Examples
CNI	                    Manages networking	                Calico, Flannel, Cilium
CSI	                    Manages storage	                    Ceph, AWS EBS, NFS
Admission Controller	Checks and modifies API requests	Custom validation
Auth	                Handles authentication	            OpenID Connect, LDAP

Real Benefit for IT Working
You can choose the best networking or storage solution for your environment. No one size fits all. Cloud or on-premise, you have options.

Use Case Examples

Need custom network policy → Install Calico CNI plugin
Need storage from AWS → Install EBS CSI plugin

2. Kubernetes API
The API is the brain of Kubernetes. Everything talks to Kubernetes through the API: kubectl, dashboard, automation tools.

API Components

Component	        Role
kubectl	            Sends commands to API server
Kube-apiserver	    Receives API requests, sends to correct component
Webhook APIs	    Custom validation or modification

Example
kubectl get pods --watch sends a request to API server, and it keeps watching for changes.

Real Benefit for IT Working
Everything is controlled through one API. You can write automation tools, scripts, or custom UIs without learning complex internal details.

3. CRDs - Custom Resource Definitions
CRD lets you create your own custom Kubernetes objects.

Kubernetes has built-in objects: Pod, Deployment, Service.
CRDs let you define your own objects like Database, Robot, or TimeMachine.

Simple Example
After defining a CRD for "Database", you can do:
kubectl get databases

And "Database" becomes a real Kubernetes object.

Real Benefit for IT Working
You can model your business domain directly in Kubernetes. If your company manages databases, you can treat a database as a Kubernetes resource. No need for external scripts.

4. Operators

Operator = CRD + Custom Controller
An operator watches CRDs and automatically manages them.

Without Operator

You create a Database CRD
Kubernetes only stores it
You manually create pods, scale, handle failures

With Operator

Operator automates everything
Deploys database, scales it, handles failures
You just define what you want, operator makes it happen

Popular Operators

Operator	            What It Does
MongoDB Operator	    Manages MongoDB databases
Cert-Manager	        Automatically issues TLS certificates
Prometheus Operator	    Deploys and manages Prometheus monitoring

Real Benefit for IT Working
Operators bring expert knowledge into code. Instead of hiring a database expert to manage your database, the operator handles day 2 operations like backup, scaling, and recovery automatically.

5. Security in Kubernetes
Authentication - Who can access?
Uses RBAC (Role-Based Access Control)
Example: Create a role that allows get and list on pods only.

Authorization - What can they do?
Checks if user is allowed to perform the action.

Admission Control - Filter requests
Blocks unauthorized API requests before they reach Kubernetes.
Example: Block deployments with root user privileges.

Network Policies - Limit pod communication
By default, all pods can talk to each other.
Network policies block unauthorized traffic like a firewall.

Example: Block all incoming traffic to a specific app.

Secrets and Encryption - Protect sensitive data
Never hardcode passwords in YAML files.
Use Kubernetes Secrets instead.
Secrets store data in Base64 encoding.

Real Benefit for IT Working
Security is built in layers. Even if one layer fails, others still protect your cluster. You can meet compliance requirements without buying external tools.